From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
Today,
European leaders raced to Washington DC
to show their support for Ukrainian
President Vladimir Zalinski as he met
with President Trump on Monday. It was
the two men's first face-to-face meeting
in the White House since their
disastrous blowup in the Oval Office
back in February. This time, Mr.
Zilinsky tried flattery and deference as
he continues to press the United States
for support in Ukraine's ongoing war
with Russia.
Today, my colleague Michael Schwarz
explains why Zalinsk's approach has
changed and how this meeting may give
him a new advantage in his efforts to
end the war.
[Applause]
[Music]
It's Tuesday, August 19th.
Michael Schwarz, we're talking to you
because you have covered the Ukraine war
since it was just an idea that we had
you on the show to talk about. So, we
really appreciate you making the time on
such a busy news day.
>> H anytime. So, Michael, there were a lot
fewer European leaders in Europe today
because so many of them flew to
Washington DC for this kind of hastily
organized but huge meeting with
President Trump and Ukrainian President
Vloimir Zalinski. So, to start, explain
to us what this meeting was all about.
This meeting was a response to a summit
that President Trump had with his
Russian counterpart, President Vladimir
Putin of Russia in Alaska last week. And
this is the latest in a series of
efforts by the Trump administration to
force some kind of settlements to the
war in Ukraine, which is coming up on
its fourth year. And there have been
these on again and offagain
conversations between the White House,
Trump and Ukrainian President Wimir
Zalinski about trying to come together
and forge some kind of peace deal.
>> Let's talk about that meeting that you
mentioned last week a little bit more.
We previewed it on Friday's show and it
was clear going into that meeting what
specifically the Europeans and Ukraine
were worried about that basically Trump
would give away the store so to speak
that he would make too many concessions
to Putin. What actually happened during
that meeting last week and how did that
meeting contribute to the meetings we
saw on Monday?
>> I think it's important to state firstly
that we don't know exactly what happened
in that meeting despite all the fanfare
around it. Trump and Putin went into
this meeting. They had a three-hour
conversation. They made statements. They
did not go into any kind of detail. And
so what we got about the meeting came
out sort of afterwards from both
European leaders who were briefed on the
call and from Trump himself. And the
bottom line was it didn't go well for
Zilinski.
>> How so?
>> For several months, it seemed that Trump
had come around to Zilinsk's way of
thinking. Trump was angry with Vladimir
Putin about strikes on cities in Ukraine
that were killing civilians. He had come
around to Zilinsk's position that a
ceasefire needed to occur before any
negotiation over a possible peace deal.
He came out and stated that before
traveling to Alaska, he said that Russia
would suffer severe consequences if they
didn't leave Alaska with a ceasefire
deal. Will Russia face any consequences
if Vladimir Putin does not agree to stop
the war after your meeting on Friday?
>> Yes, they will. Yeah.
>> What will there consequences?
>> There will be sanctions, tariffs.
>> There will be I don't have to say there
will be very severe consequences. Yes.
>> And then he turned around and after that
meeting came out and his statement
seemed to align more fully with what
Vladimir Putin had desired.
>> One right now. we're going to stop
really five, six, 7,000 thousands of
people a week from being killed. And
President Putin wants to see that as
much as I do. So, uh, again, Mr.
President, I'd like to thank you very
much. And he jettisoned the idea that a
ceasefire was a prerequisite for further
talks. He said that he was okay with the
two sides continuing to fight while the
details of a peace deal came together.
And he also described what seemed to be
a kind of concession from Vladimir
Putin, which is that Putin, according to
Trump, would agree to halt fighting and
freeze the war along the current lines
so long as he obtained a large chunk of
territory in eastern Ukraine known as
the Donbos. This put Zilinski, it would
seem, in a very, very difficult position
of having to respond to something that
for him is untenable. Giving up
territory, one for the Ukrainians is
against the constitution. There's a
constitutional rule preventing the
president from giving up territory if
it's not done through a referendum. And
two, this is a strategic area,
strategic, well-fortified area for
Ukraine that would leave them vulnerable
should Russia attack again if they were
to give that up.
>> So, okay. So all of that leads to
Zilinsky coming to the White House. What
do we know about why so many European
leaders decided to also join him there?
>> I don't think we know specifically why
they joined him there, but we can
surmise the last time that Vladimir
Zalinski went to the Oval Office and met
with Trump. It was
>> disastrous.
>> An absolute disaster.
>> Have you said thank you once this entire
meeting? No. In this entire meeting,
have you said thank you? As everyone I
think remembers it devolved into a
shouting match in particular when Vice
President JD Vance accused Sinsky of not
being grateful enough.
>> This is like say thank you
except that there except except that
there are disagreements.
>> This set off a few months of really
tense situation between the United
States and Ukraine. There was a time
when Trump cut off intelligence that
Ukraine uses to target enemy troops.
There was a time that they cut off
supplies of needed weaponry. And this
was probably the most dire situation
that Ukraine founded itself in since the
beginning of the war. And I think the
European leaders together with Zalinski
hatched this plan to basically give
Zilinsky backup. Zilinsky was going to
bring a posi with him this time rather
than going alone into the White House.
>> Right. And all of that leads to this
pretty remarkable scene where you have
all of these European leaders basically
descending on the White House. Can you
just sort of set the scene for us?
>> Yeah. I mean, as as Trump would say, it
was great television. You had the White
House decked out with military honor
guard holding flags. you fleets of SUVs
streaming in, dropping off some of the
world's most powerful leaders to go in
to the White House for this really kind
of extraordinary
gathering of people.
>> Can you just run through who was there
today from the European side? Yes, it
was obviously President Vimir Zinsk's
Ukraine, the British prime minister,
French president, Italian prime
minister, the German chancellor, the
Finnish president, the European
Commission president, and the NATO
secretary general.
>> And clearly the last, as you put it,
disastrous meeting between Trump and
Zilinski must have been on everybody's
mind. The tone, I watched the press
conference and the tone was remarkably
different between these two men. Can you
describe their interactions a little bit
more?
>> Well, thank you very much. It's an honor
to have the president of Ukraine with
us. We've had a lot of good discussions,
a lot of good talks, and I think
progress is being made, very very
substantial progress in many ways.
>> Despite the the topic that they were
there to discuss and the continuing
ongoing bloody fighting in Ukraine,
there were points that were almost
jovial. So you say during during the war
you can't have elections. So let me just
say three and a half years from now. So
you mean if we happen to be in a war
with somebody
no more elections. Oh
>> I wonder what the I wonder what the fake
>> it's almost felt like there was backs
slapping going on. Trump went on a small
segue to describe how good Zilinski
looked. And this is of course coming on
the heels of that meeting in February
where one of the major points of
contention was the way that Zillinsky
was dressed. He is
>> That's right. They were they criticized
him for not wearing a suit if I remember
correctly.
>> Right. And in this meeting, Zilinsky in
what some are describing as a kind of
concession was in a kind of field suit
uh this all black outfit with a jacket
that he had he had worn before uh at the
uh funeral of Pope Francis and uh on
other occasions. President Zilinski, you
look fabulous in that suit.
>> I said the same.
>> Yeah, look, you look good.
>> I said the same thing.
>> Yeah, look good.
>> I said the one that attacked you last
time. See that?
>> And Trump went out of his way to comment
on that. And one of the journalists,
right-wing journalists who had attacked
Zalinsky for his lack of a suit in the
White House, apologized and said he
looked great.
>> I apologize to you. Look, you look
wonderful. Uh, no. My first question for
you, President Zilinski,
>> in the same suit.
>> You see, I changed your
>> Maybe yours is much better,
>> but Zilinsky seemed much more in
command. It's also notable that JD Vance
said nothing throughout the entire
affair. And it was JD Vance that really
led the charge against Zilinsky the
first time, and he sat quietly with
Marco Rubio and others. While Zalinsky
was pretty much given the floor by Trump
to state his peace. He spoke about the
toll that the war has had on civilians.
they live under each day attacks. You
know that today there have been a lot of
attacks and a lot of wounded people and
the child was dead. It's a small bomb.
>> He noted that in the hours before he
arrived at the White House there was a
series of strikes on major cities in
Ukraine that killed at this point it's
about 14 people I think including a
small child. And Trump really expressed
sympathy for this.
>> Uh it's been almost four years now that
a lot of people were killed last week. a
lot of people last week. I mean,
millions of people killed, but a lot of
people last week for whatever reason.
>> Trump has long sort of been frustrated
by Russia's targeting of civilian areas
in Ukraine. And it was sort of a
surprising
move by Putin to allow these strikes to
go forward. Just as Zilinski was on the
verge of talking to Trump, he basically
gave Zalinsky a wedge with which to use
with Trump to to bring him around to his
position. What we saw was basically not
just a very different Silinski, but also
a very different Trump. It sounds like a
Trump who's really giving Zalinski a
platform to make his case to the world.
>> I think that's right. The initial
meeting in February between Zalinsky and
Trump and his team at the White House
seemed like a premeditated ambush. This
meeting seemed like it was set up to
allow Zillinsky to state his peace. In
Alaska, Putin and Trump came out for I
don't know, it must have been less than
15 minutes in total following their
three-hour discussion, delivered a
series of platitudes about how great the
meeting went and provided no details.
Here, they really got into some of the
substantive issues such as security
guarantees.
>> But we will give them very good
protection, very good security. That's
part of it. And the people that are
waiting for us, uh, they are, I think
they're very like-minded. They want to
they want to help out all
>> Well, can we get into that a little bit?
Like, can you just explain to us a bit
more about what exactly is on the table,
what those terms actually mean,
>> right? Yeah. We don't exactly know
what's on the table because we don't
exactly know what the Russian side wants
other than full control over Ukraine or
whether even the Russian position has
changed at all from the moment that
Putin announced his invasion. But from
the Ukrainian side, Zilinsky came in
with his first demand, I would say, is a
ceasefire,
>> right? as Zilinsky has said over and
over again like why would I enter
negotiations with bombs raining down on
me basically.
>> Exactly. And Putin basically proved his
point by shelling these uh these cities
today. In the meetings today, Trump
didn't appear to waver at all on the
ceasefire despite Zalinski continuing to
press him on this as well as other
European leaders. The other issue on the
table is one of security guarantees.
Zalinsky for his part, he was asked sort
of what sort of security guarantees
Ukraine needed from the United States
when it comes to the future of its
stability.
>> What security guarantees do you need
from President Trump to be able to make
a deal? Is it American troops,
intelligent equipment? What is it?
>> And Zilinsky answered with one word,
everything.
>> Really we it's it's includes two part
first Ukrainian army.
And this is where Trump's position seems
to be a bit more favorable to the
Ukrainians. After long resisting, I
think promising any kind of security
guarantees for the Ukrainians, Trump has
wavered recently in saying that yes, he
is in favor of some kind of security
guarantee backed up by the United
States.
But I think the message that was
delivered today in Washington is that
this war is bigger than just Russia and
Ukraine. The fact that there were so
many European leaders there plus the
NATO general secretary, it shows that
Europe considers the war in Ukraine to
be about their security as well. And the
question is whether Trump is going to go
along with that or whether Trump is
going to reorient the United States and
align more with Putin and Putin's idea
of the world which is a world divided
among great powers with lesser powers
having not much say.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
We've had a very successful day thus far
and important discussions as we work to
end the killing and stop the war in
Ukraine. We're all working for the same
goal. Very
>> okay. So, how did the meeting go between
Trump, Zalinski, and the other European
leaders?
>> In the portion of the meeting with
European leaders that was orchestrated
for the press, the tone was very similar
to that with Zilinski.
>> Very good. You look great with your tan.
Where'd you get that tan? I want to I
want to get a tan like that.
>> Everybody was in a very jovial mood. The
point seems to have been from the
European leaders perspective to flatter
Trump.
>> Thank you very much, Mr. President. I
think in the past two weeks, we've
probably had more progress in ending
this war than we have in the past three
and a half years.
>> I will be very brief. I really want to
thank you uh President of the United
States, dear Donald, for the fact that
you, as I said before, broke the
deadlock. There was a lot of thank yous,
a lot of people praising Trump for just
making these negotiations
happen.
>> So, something is changing. Something has
changed thanks to you.
>> So far, nobody nobody's been able to
bring it to this point. So, I thank you
for that.
>> They're doing this because they know
that this is what they need to do to get
Donald Trump on board with their plan
for the future of Ukraine and the future
of European security. Mhm.
>> The bottom line is that Europe needs the
United States. The bottom line is
Ukraine needs the United States and the
United States is no longer a guarantee.
The support of the United States in
Europe, the support of the United States
in Ukraine is no longer a guarantee. And
that's what this meeting was about.
>> And besides saying a lot of thank yous
and a lot of praise, what did they
actually sort of discuss in terms of the
substance of what's on the table
>> at this point in the meeting? This was
the first time we started to see a
little bit of push back.
>> To be honest, we all would like to see a
ceasefire.
>> Where things became a bit more pointed
was over the issue of a ceasefire. And
at one point, Friedick Merittz, the
chancellor of Germany, stated flatly his
disagreement with President Trump.
>> I can't imagine that the next meeting
would took place without a ceasefire. So
let's work on that and let's try to put
pressure on Russia because the
credibility of this efforts, these
efforts we are undertaking today are
depending on at least a ceasefire.
>> He said that a ceasefire had to happen
before any future negotiations
and he urged Trump to focus on a
ceasefire first and foremost.
>> What was their position on security
guarantees at this meeting?
The security guarantees have not been
fleshed out. The idea, as we understand
it, is there would be some kind of
foreign contingent of troops presented
and placed in Ukraine. And Trump has
previously said that he would be
supportive of that when asked about that
in one of the many news conferences
today.
>> Your team has talked about security
guarantees. Could that involve US
troops? Would you rule that out in the
future? uh we'll let you know that maybe
later today.
>> He did not rule out that the US would
send troops. He said this is something
that would be negotiated
down the line. In the past, he has been
very very clear that he would not send
US troops to act as a security guarantee
in Ukraine,
>> right? That seems like a huge change of
direction for him.
>> It's unclear whether Trump perhaps
misspoke a little bit or was being
intentionally koi, but yeah, he did not
give an unequivocal no. M
>> when asked whether he would be willing
to send troops into Ukraine,
>> there'll be a lot of uh there'll be a
lot of help when it comes to security.
There's going to be a lot of help. It's
going to be good. Uh
>> but this this is all theoretical at this
point. First of all, this is the red
line for Putin. This is the reason
Ukraine's kind of increasingly close
relationship with the West militarily
that he claims he invaded Ukraine in the
first place. A statement released by the
Russian foreign ministry timed it seems
to come out right when these
negotiations were starting took this
idea of any troops aligned with NATO
entering Ukraine completely off the
table. They said that this is a no-go
area for us. So it's not clear how much
wiggle room there is on that point. But
to that point about the red line and
Europe sending troops to the front lines
of this Ukraine Russia conflict, I just
want to step back for a minute here and
talk about the role that these European
countries seem to be playing because
it's not like they are itching to send
troops to the front lines, right? like
this war has been grinding on forever
and it actually feels like the US and
everybody else is sending enough support
to Ukraine so that it can keep fighting
but not enough support to frankly allow
them to actually win the war. Like as
you mentioned there are no troops on the
ground and Europe and the United States
seem unwilling to do that at least up
until now because they don't want to be
dragged into this wider conflict. And so
even though all of these European
leaders seem to have been willing to
interrupt their summer vacations to fly
out to the White House and have
Zalinski's back in these meetings with
Trump, what are they actually committed
to?
>> I think you laid out perfectly the
Ukrainian complaint about Western
support from the very beginning of this
war. That complaint goes I'll just
reiterate what you said because you said
it eloquently that the West wants to
give us just enough to survive. if they
don't want to give us just enough to
win. And the question is whether that is
changing at this point.
>> And at President Trump's prompting, yes,
I think you're right that no country is
willing to consider sending troops to
Ukraine at this moment. There was a time
when Emanuel Macron, the French
president, raised this possibility, but
there's no serious discussion of any
troops going into Ukraine at the moment
from Europe. But things are changing in
Europe. Trump has spooked the Europeans
into thinking more seriously about their
defense. The conventional wisdom after
World War II was that there was an
exchange made the United States would
provide a security blanket so that
Europe could rebuild itself and not have
to worry about also protecting itself
while it did so. Trump has come to
Europe and I think many Europeans agree
and said, you know, we're tired of
taking such a strong role in your
security. It's time for you to start
pulling your weight. And Europe is
beginning to rethink some of these
questions that seemed in the past to be
impossible to imagine. You know,
Germany, which spent 80 years trying to
break its past culture of militarism
after World War II, is once again
building up its military. So, it's not
out of the question that a stronger
European role in providing for Ukrainian
security could be on the table for
discussion sort of in the future, but
we're certainly not there yet.
>> But it's worth also just noting just in
terms of what Trump has applied pressure
to. It's not just Germany that has been
building up its military. I mean,
basically Trump has been able to ring
concessions out of NATO so that the
countries have all committed to spending
more on defense, right? which they are
doing not necessarily in order to defend
Ukraine, but certainly these ideas are
not divorced from one another.
>> They're maybe not doing it necessarily
to defend Ukraine, but I think the idea
of a threat from Russia that goes beyond
Ukraine is starting to seep into the
European psyche. You definitely see this
when you go to the Baltics these days,
these are the countries that are on
Russia's western border. They're
preparing for war down to laying tank
traps and dragons teeth. And you see all
of them having jettisoned a uh treaty
banning anti-personnel landmines. These
countries are preparing for war. And
that mentality has started to go further
west. You see this in Britain's recent
security statement talking about the
threats emanating from Russia. You even
see it in Germany, which for so long,
even after the invasion of Ukraine in
2022, has been hesitant to see and view
Russia as an enemy. You see them
building up their military, not with
theoretical threats in mind, but with
the specific threat that Russia poses
for the future.
>> I know that it's early, but at this
point, what do we know about what will
actually come out of this series of
meetings that we are talking about that
happened on Monday? like were any of
these sticking points that we're talking
about, the ceasefire, the land transfer,
security guarantees, it doesn't sound
like any of them were solved, but did
they inch any closer to resolving them?
I think Zalinsky came to Washington
today in a significant amount of danger.
You had Trump writing as late as Sunday
on Truth Social that President Zalinski
could end the war with Russia almost
immediately if he wanted to. And that
was contingent upon him agreeing to this
land concession, giving up the totality
of the dawn boss,
>> which is basically a non-starter,
>> right? But in this meeting, it seems
like Zilinski
for the time being sort of neutralized
any of the static that discussion of
that question would create. And he did
that by doing what people who have
negotiated with Trump have learned to
do, just to find something to agree with
him on. And Trump is keen on what he's
describing as a trilateral meeting
between Zalinski, Putin, and himself
that he wants to get done very, very
quickly. And so what Zilinski did, and
what Trump seems to have backed him on,
is say, "Look, we'll discuss these
territorial issues, but only in a
face-to-face
conversation with Vladimir Putin." And
it should be pointed out that while
Zillinsky says he's willing to to have
that face-to-face conversation and Trump
says that he would really like that
face-to-face conversation to happen, the
Kremlin has been largely silent on this.
Uh, and it's not clear whether Putin
would ever at this point sit down and
have a meeting with President Zilinski.
Mhm.
>> You know what I think we've learned from
these two summits between Trump and
Putin and Trump Zalinski and these
European leaders is that these talks
allowed all sides to air their
grievances. They allowed all sides to
raise the conditions under which they
would continue talking. But nobody
agreed
or even aired any idea of what their
concessions might be. And so really what
this ends up looking like is just sort
of a game of pingpong between Zalinski
and Putin and Trump is the ball.
>> And Zilinsky has basically knocked the
ball back into Putin's court.
>> Yeah, I really do believe. I've known
him for a long time. I've always had a
great relationship with him. I think
that President Putin wants to find an
answer, too. And we'll see. And at a in
a certain period of time, not very far
from now, a week or two weeks, we're
going to know whether or not we're going
to solve this or
>> now it's up for Putin
>> to respond to this idea of a facetoface
meeting with Zilinski.
>> The media, thank you all very much. We
appreciate it. Thank you very much.
And all of this, I should say, this
meeting today, this possible trilateral
meeting, everything we've discussed
assumes that Vladimir Putin actually
wants a deal. But we've said on this
show and we've reported in the Times
many, many times over and over again, it
does not seem like Putin wants a deal at
all. Right? He wants Ukraine. And so I
wonder whether all of this that has
happened in the last few days whether it
strikes you I don't know as a kind of
theater almost.
>> I think
theater is what
President Trump likes and theater is
what President Trump understands.
I don't know if in private conversations
he's more interested in the substance of
what is going on, but in his public
appearances,
it seems that he is more interested in
the pomp and the circumstance
and in making decrees and having them
fulfilled than in getting down into the
nitty-gritty of negotiating
what is at this point an absolutely
intractable
conflict. And I think that both Vladimir
Putin and Wimir Zalinski
understand this and have come to learn
this about Trump and are trying to use
that to get whatever advantage that they
can.
But what this ultimately means is that
there's no end to the war in sight. And
what they're really having is a
conversations about how to manage Trump.
and they're not having conversations
about how to end this war.
>> Michael Schwarz, thank you so much.
>> I really appreciate it. Thank you very
much.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know.
Today, the Trump administration has
discussed taking a 10% stake in Intel to
help shore up the troubled US chip maker
and bolster domestic semiconductor
manufacturing. According to three people
familiar with the talks,
one idea being considered is to convert
$10.86 billion in recent federal grants
into equity in Intel, which is worth
about hundred billion. The proposal
would be one of the largest government
bailouts in a US company since the
rescue of the auto industry after the
2008 financial crisis.
And the right-wing cable channel Newsmax
has agreed to pay $67 million to settle
a lawsuit against Dominion Voting
Systems, which Newsmax had falsely
accused of rigging votes in the 2020
presidential election.
The settlement did not require Newsmax
to issue an apology or a retraction. And
the company said in a statement on
Monday that it stood by its coverage as
quote fair, balanced, and conducted
within professional standards of
journalism.
Today's episode was produced by Michael
Simon Johnson and Stella Tan. It was
edited by Brendan Clinkenberg and Mike
Benois and was engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]